Blockchains, like a traditional database,
are a way to store data.
You can think of them as a dataset with specific characteristics.
In this video, we will compare the characteristics
of a Blockchain to those of a traditional database.
To start, let's look at the network.
Unlike traditional databases that rely on a centralized authority,
blockchains are supported by a distributed network.
Blockchains allow anyone to download a copy of the database for themselves.
This gives them full access to the data and functions available to the database.
A benefit of this is that no single entity
can regulate the data that exists on the database.
A downside to this is that there's
no central authority to help dictate what information is accurate.
The distributed network was made as a way to reach consensus
on the accuracy of data without the need for this authority.
As we've seen, the consensus algorithms involved with this can be pretty
complicated and results in other issues like network speeds.
Next, there's different functions available to users
on a Blockchain when compared to a traditional database.
While in a traditional database,
users can create, read,
update or delete data, in a Blockchain,
they can only read,
append or validate data.
A major difference to note here is that Blockchains do not allow users to delete data.
Rather than deleting or overriding all data,
Blockchains create a new record.
For example, in a Bitcoin transaction,
let's say Brandy has 10 Bitcoin in her wallet.
The transactions that lead to this balance are permanently stored on the Blockchain.
If Brandy gives me four Bitcoin,
that transaction is also recorded on the blockchain.
Brandy's new wallet balance will appear as six Bitcoin.
The transactions that lead to her original balance of 10 Bitcoin are still not wiped out.
They're recorded on the Blockchain along with any future transaction information.
Since you can't delete Blockchain data,
the database is considered immutable.
Immutable is the term used to describe any data that
cannot be updated after being added to the database.
The benefit of this is that the Blockchain maintains
a permanent historical record of all transactions that have happened on the network.
If there's any dispute over a Blockchain transaction,
there's always evidence to go back and check.
The downside to this is the immense amount of
memory space and resources that are needed to store this dataset.
Next, the way authorization is handled on
a Blockchain is much different than in a traditional database.
With a Blockchain, authorization isn't controlled by any central authority.
Every user on the network has equal access to
data and functions available to each of the users.
While both types of data are very secure,
the access you can gain from a single point of authorization is drastically different.
Once you have the appropriate credentials,
you can gain access to any type of database.
The differences on a Blockchain the best you
can do is get the credentials of a single user,
and even then you can only access their personal data.
With a traditional database,
if you get authorization for the database,
you just got access to the personal data of everyone in the system.
For that reason, we consider data on a Blockchain to be more secure.
But this type of security does come with some downsides.
For one, without having a central authority and control,
it's difficult to resolve disputes that might come up.
With a Blockchain, you can't call a company to fix something you disagree with.
The security is entirely handled by software running the system.
The systems that help maintain Blockchain security exists to
facilitate the fact that a Blockchain is highly transparent.
As we mentioned previously,
anyone can access the same data and
functionality provided to anyone else on a Blockchain.
This is in contrast to a traditional database where
this permissioning is controlled by the authority that owns it.
We consider this open access to be an upside to
the Blockchain solutions because that's exactly why it was created in the first place.
One potential downside to this is that you won't have
a careful permissioning system like on a traditional database.
To recap, we just compare the differences between the network, functions,
mutability, security, and transparency of each of these database solutions.
We tried to avoid making judgments about which
is better because that's not really the point,
neither of these solutions is better than the other.
Overall, they're only better or worse in a given situation.
There's also many other ways these databases could be compared.
Things like the ease of use,
integration with existing technologies,
and other important characteristics can definitely come into play here.
These are just some of the basics to get you started so feel
free to dig deeper into these ideas if you're interested in learning more.
Hopefully, this is a good starting point for you.
Understanding these differences will help you decide when
an application is best suited for the Blockchain and when it isn't.